.TH BYTHOS 1 "" "bythos 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bythos \- firmware trust posture auditor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bythos
[\fB\-j\fR|\fB\-\-json\fR]
.br
.B bythos
\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR
.br
.B bythos
\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bythos
inspects the firmware trust surface of a Linux host and reports each
finding with an explicit posture state. It is read-only by design:
classifications come from sysfs, procfs, EFI variables, and a selected
set of optional userspace helpers, and no host configuration is ever
modified. A single invocation produces a firmware posture snapshot for
the running system, in either a colored text report or machine-readable
JSON.
.PP
The audit groups its checks into ten subgroups under a single
\fBfirmware\fR group:
.IP \(bu 2
.B efi
\- UEFI runtime visibility, ESRT entry count
.IP \(bu 2
.B secure boot
\- Secure Boot state and setup mode, platform key owner, MOK enrollments
with cert names, db / dbx contents and sizes, SBAT policy level,
Microsoft 3rd-party CA detection, efivarfs mount mode, sbctl key
management state
.IP \(bu 2
.B boot chain
\- bootloader version, bootloader SBAT generation versus current
revocation policy, shim signature presence, initramfs permissions,
SBAT revocation list visibility, EFI BootOrder USB / network / CD
entries and BootNext one-shot override, EFI BootOrder immutable flag,
BIOS USB boot firmware-attributes setting, SMBIOS Type 24 firmware
admin / power-on / keyboard password slots
.IP \(bu 2
.B esp
\- /boot and ESP ownership, ESP filesystem type, EFI vendor directory
recognition, default boot fallback (BOOTX64.EFI / BOOTAA64.EFI) identity
versus shim, pending UpdateCapsule files
.IP \(bu 2
.B tpm
\- TPM 2.0 presence, dictionary-attack lockout policy, PCR 7 and PCR 0
measurement state, TPM event log presence (binary) and CRTM signal
(ASCII parser)
.IP \(bu 2
.B luks
\- LUKS volume visibility, LUKS header version (LUKS1 vs LUKS2),
dm-integrity configuration, TPM2 binding presence, and PCR coverage
split between Secure Boot baseline (PCR 7) and boot chain (PCR 4 / 9)
.IP \(bu 2
.B platform firmware
\- Intel BIOS write protection (BIOSWE / BLE / SMM_BWP), Intel ME
firmware version, Intel DCI MSR state or AMD PSP visibility, chipsec
deep audit availability
.IP \(bu 2
.B platform dma
\- IOMMU group count, IOMMU posture from kernel cmdline, Thunderbolt
pre-boot DMA protection
.IP \(bu 2
.B cpu
\- CPU microcode revision, CPU vulnerability scanner availability,
AMD SME / Intel TME memory encryption flags
.IP \(bu 2
.B fwupd
\- fwupd service and refresh timer state, LVFS remote enablement,
firmware inventory, update status, and history, curated Hardware
Security Index (HSI) signals with vendor-conditional Intel and AMD
entries
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
Print machine-readable JSON instead of the colored text report.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.PP
Any positional argument or unknown flag exits with status 2.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
No \fBfail\fR result.
.TP
.B 1
At least one \fBfail\fR result.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (positional argument, unknown flag).
.SH OUTPUT
Each check result carries one of four states:
.TP
.B ok
Expected posture observed.
.TP
.B warn
Weaker posture, regression shy of fail, or unparseable signal.
.TP
.B fail
Direct posture regression (for example, Secure Boot disabled).
.TP
.B skip
Probe could not run. A missing optional dependency normally produces
\fBskip\fR, not \fBwarn\fR.
.PP
Plain output begins with the banner and overall summary, then prints one
flat block per subgroup. There is no per-subgroup or trailing recap.
.PP
JSON output mirrors the same data and adds three fields per result row:
.TP
.B skip_reason
One of \fBNONE\fR (non-skip rows), \fBTOOL_ABSENT\fR,
\fBFEATURE_ABSENT\fR, \fBEXEC_FAILED\fR, \fBPROBE_INDETERMINATE\fR,
\fBREPORT_FIELD_ABSENT\fR, \fBOUTPUT_UNPARSEABLE\fR,
\fBNOT_CONFIGURED\fR, \fBSUBJECT_ABSENT\fR, \fBHW_ABSENT\fR,
\fBVENDOR_SCOPE\fR.
.TP
.B requires_root
True when a non-root run skipped the row for lack of privilege.
.TP
.B actionable
True when the skip is recoverable by installing or configuring a tool.
.PP
JSON is a single firmware-only snapshot. Top-level keys: \fBmode\fR,
\fBbanner\fR, \fBgroups\fR, \fBoverall\fR, \fBexit_code\fR,
\fBexit_meaning\fR.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set to a non-empty value, suppresses ANSI color in plain output.
.TP
.B TERM
When set to \fBdumb\fR or \fBlinux\fR, ANSI color is suppressed.
.SH FILES
Read-only paths grouped by purpose. None are written.
.PP
.B EFI runtime and Secure Boot:
.RS 2
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi/esrt/entries
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/db-*
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/dbx-*
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/SbatLevel*
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/Boot*
.RE
.PP
.B TPM:
.RS 2
.TP
.I /sys/class/tpm/tpm0
.TP
.I /sys/class/tpm/tpm0/tpm_version_major
.TP
.I /sys/kernel/security/tpm0/binary_bios_measurements
.TP
.I /sys/kernel/security/tpm0/ascii_bios_measurements
.RE
.PP
.B Platform DMA and silicon:
.RS 2
.TP
.I /sys/kernel/iommu_groups
.TP
.I /sys/bus/thunderbolt/devices
.TP
.I /sys/class/firmware-attributes
.TP
.I /sys/class/mei/mei0/fw_version
.TP
.I /dev/cpu/0/msr
(root)
.TP
.I /sys/bus/pci/devices/0000:00:1f.0/config
(root)
.TP
.I /sys/module/ccp
(AMD PSP visibility)
.RE
.PP
.B CPU and host:
.RS 2
.TP
.I /proc/cpuinfo
.TP
.I /proc/cmdline
.TP
.I /proc/mounts
.RE
.PP
.B ESP candidates:
.RS 2
.TP
.I /boot/efi
mount, validated by \fI/boot/efi/EFI\fR
.TP
.I /efi
mount, validated by \fI/efi/EFI\fR
.TP
.I /boot
mount, validated by \fI/boot/EFI\fR
.RE
.PP
.B fwupd LVFS configuration:
.RS 2
.TP
.I /etc/fwupd/remotes.d/lvfs.conf
.TP
.I /usr/share/fwupd/remotes.d/lvfs.conf
.RE
.PP
.B LUKS block devices (dynamic):
.RS 2
.PP
Each LUKS-formatted block device discovered via \fBlsblk\fR(8) is
queried at \fI/dev/<name>\fR with \fBcryptsetup\fR(8) \fBluksDump\fR
for header version, dm-integrity configuration, and systemd-tpm2
token PCR mask.
.RE
.SH DEPENDENCIES
None of the tools below are required. Each is consulted only when
present; absence demotes the dependent checks to \fBskip\fR rather
than \fBfail\fR. Most are invoked to read posture data; the chipsec
deep-audit helpers and \fBspectre-meltdown-checker\fR are detected for
availability only, since their full audits are out of bythos scope.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR mokutil (1)
\- Secure Boot state, setup mode, platform key owner, MOK enrollment
list, db / dbx and SBAT revocation enumeration
.IP \(bu 2
.BR sbctl (8)
\- sbctl key management initialization status
.IP \(bu 2
.BR fwupdmgr (1)
\- LVFS remote check, firmware inventory, update status and history,
curated HSI signal read
.IP \(bu 2
.BR systemctl (1)
\- fwupd service and fwupd-refresh.timer state probes
.IP \(bu 2
.BR tpm2_getcap (1)
\- TPM2 dictionary-attack lockout policy
.IP \(bu 2
.BR tpm2_pcrread (1)
\- PCR 0 and PCR 7 measurement state
.IP \(bu 2
.BR cryptsetup (8)
\- LUKS header version, dm-integrity configuration, token enumeration,
and TPM2 PCR mask read
.IP \(bu 2
.BR lsblk (8)
\- LUKS volume discovery
.IP \(bu 2
.BR pesign (1)
\- shim binary signature presence
.IP \(bu 2
.BR sha256sum (1)
\- fallback boot loader vs shim identity check
.IP \(bu 2
.BR dmidecode (8)
\- SMBIOS Type 24 firmware password slots (root)
.IP \(bu 2
.BR grub-install (8)
\- bootloader version probe (GRUB)
.IP \(bu 2
.BR grub2-install (8)
\- bootloader version probe (GRUB on RPM-family distributions)
.IP \(bu 2
.BR bootctl (1)
\- bootloader version probe (systemd-boot)
.IP \(bu 2
.BR chipsec_main (1)
or legacy
.BR chipsec (1)
\- deep platform firmware audit availability signal
.IP \(bu 2
spectre-meltdown-checker
\- CPU mitigation scanner availability signal
.SH NOTES
Most checks read sysfs and procfs surfaces that any audit user can
already access. A small subset needs root for full coverage:
.IP \(bu 2
Intel DCI MSR (\fI/dev/cpu/0/msr\fR) for the debug-interface register.
.IP \(bu 2
Intel BIOS write protection (PCI config space at 00:1f.0) for the
BIOS_CNTL register.
.IP \(bu 2
SMBIOS Type 24 firmware password slots via \fBdmidecode\fR(8).
.IP \(bu 2
LUKS TPM binding read via \fBcryptsetup\fR(8) \fBluksDump\fR on raw
LUKS block devices.
.PP
Without root these probes emit \fBskip\fR with \fB(requires root)\fR in
plain output and \fBrequires_root: true\fR in JSON.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
bythos
sudo bythos
bythos --json | jq '.overall'
NO_COLOR=1 bythos
.fi
.SH AUTHOR
Giorgi Kishmareia (q1sh101).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fwupdmgr (1),
.BR mokutil (1),
.BR sbctl (8),
.BR tpm2_getcap (1),
.BR tpm2_pcrread (1),
.BR cryptsetup (8),
.BR lsblk (8),
.BR pesign (1),
.BR dmidecode (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR grub-install (8),
.BR grub2-install (8),
.BR bootctl (1),
.BR chipsec_main (1),
.BR chipsec (1)
